okay everyone but in siena is going to
be a live streamer
okay
you don't want to do this
so
try to figure it out
you have to figure out how the phone
films
super steady
[Applause]
oh
[Music]
okay
not
[Applause]
oh
[Music]
[Applause]
foreign
i
[Music]
uh
foreign
is
last 25 years
[Music]
yes
all foreign
foreign
separated
groups of five people
okay
hey
[Music]
they know what they're doing they're
very smart
thank you
[Music]
oh
foreign
[Applause]
oh
[Music]
[Applause]
foreign
[Music]
hello
foreign
[Music]
it's kind of smooth
because the camera is facing up
[Music]
backwards
foreign
no
[Music]
[Applause]
stay with me
[Music]
foreign
um
[Music]
my
hey
me
[Music]
foreign
[Applause]
[Music]
oh
he's gonna do it
is
[Music]
foreign
oh
[Music]
um
oh
foreign
[Music]
uh
okay
thank you
[Music]
[Applause]
huh
is
i was there once i don't know where it
[Music]
hey
[Applause]
is
[Music]
oh
thank you
[Music]
is
no
it
and that's it
oh
um
valencia
[Music]
foreign
spanx and the idea was to build a
different topic
dedicated to plastic ducts why
because they haven't harmed anybody
they are very very very cute
and they are please come come they're
charming
some ideas
hey
no
what do you think
hey
from
yeah
see you later
mm-hmm
[Music]
and in this particular
she is now in the middle of a terrible
volcano eruption and might be losing her
house and this is it's incredible it's
just these things i mean
the incredible things that have happened
she's there
and so we've been in contact with
there's nobody's been hurt nobody's been
wounded but it's just
tragic to see all these old houses going
away
and
then they're all very different things
this is also for me very important this
is a painting by romano mussolini i'm
part italian
he was the son of
benito
the son that's the picture of him young
with his father has a dictator and
that's him
nearly at the end of his life and he was
in 2069
and this guy
the most terrible dictators
dedicated his life to playing the piano
and painting clowns
he painted hundreds and hundreds and
hundreds of plants some psychological
psychologists could study
we have on the walls our saints we have
many saints
uh different saints uh
that's juliano la foste the one a roman
one of the last roman emperors
who wanted to end christians
go back to
to worshipping the old gods
[Music]
because he loved mother nature and the
very interesting things
um
this is one of the most famous paintings
of el grico but we modified it a bit so
there's me
my ex-wife and my son
and behind all the people that have
helped us building this
chapel
and so that's also the way of saying
that we have entered
the history of
yeah
there are many things over there from
the soviet union
i have
a 1954 plastic back made in the soviet
union
it's there
and so at the time of
the cold war and atom bombs and and
hydrogen bombs and we were in the the
north korean war and and korean war in
the west there were still people in
russia making plastic ducks
which i think
and oh and so there were people making
plastic ducks in the united states and
the
so that's these are soviet union plastic
bags from 1954
and we have
this too is for me very important
this is uh
the from as a french book it's francois
and it's a story of fanta
and this and you see that this is a book
a comedy book
making jokes about the catholic church
and it was published
in 1789
in paris
there was a revolution and finally this
this uh that they could publish
comedy books about religion
before you would have been burnt if you
if you made a book like that so so this
book before and this is an actual
edition you can see the date
it was at the french revolution they
started to print comedy books making fun
of religion
amen yeah
and
you are russian who is a
there was a russian person here
was my friend uh we we performed
together and i have a
olex pop-up
um scarf
from his soap
thank you
and then
on sundays we do this is oleg
scarf he used it
always in his shows this is me with
slavapoloonin
just a few months before olympus
and that's his funeral
and i like this picture
this is national there's a circus in
brexit
thousands of people in the street
waiting
and he put his club his clown
in in the in the ring in the circus ring
that they exposed him yes and imagine
that thousands of people coming to
honour
and so again
we have been here
and
i understand
quite honestly
in the last few days
um
and this this must be something to do
with him too yeah
we are honoring small things yeah small
powerful little things
instead of the big things yeah in a
small little place and doing this with
trying to make this beautiful
trying to have fun of course
people who helped me here making this
a lot a lot of people work
professionally in theaters and they've
helped me we have used recycled books
uh loads of these things here were found
in the street furniture pieces or
whatever and then people have helped me
decorate them and put them into here
we have been attacked five years ago
the right-wing people came smashed the
doors and threw a petrol bomb here and
all this burnt oh my god and we saved
one of the dogs there
he is one of the dogs
oh my god
it's melted
yes and there were angels and plastic
angels melted too we just scooped that
up and now we've got metal doors to stop
to stop
yeah so imagine
the plastic dog being attacked by
fascism
it's a victory actually yes it's a
victory of course in the world
and then we have
all the some of our girls uh
virtual marx up there
nietzsche is dead
god is dead nature is dead and i don't
feel too well either
and the other one is
the religion is considered truth
by the people
fake
by the intelligence by the intelligencia
and useful by power yes
and that was written
um
by
in in the first century
um
but not
the
[Music]
and so
the
celebration um all over the world i see
that there are many places that this has
been done
um
today yes if i am here and if we are
here the menu is is here all hello
[Music]
um are we on schedule are we are we how
are we doing
no no no no
wait for us i hope
it's so active this time right it's so
important today
is to make contacts and that we know
each other and this is fantastic
uh
taking pictures so that we can have them
in in here and and especially
if we dedicate ourselves to the the the
vulnerable people the people who don't
have powers i mean it's easy for people
to have power who have power to be in
contact they are all the time in context
but the normal people don't have time to
be in contact normal people have to work
more people have their children to look
after and millions of other things to do
and so um
and this has been the the role of
i consider myself a clown a buffoon a
circus or
jester the court just yeah and this has
been the fight the book just us for the
first time ever
to try and be in contact with each other
and and find strength in in the fact
that we exist that we know that there
are other countries people doing the
same thing and feeling the same thing
and so when i was asked to participate
today
i thought this is wonderful and
wonderful the fact of
keeping this up
and and trying to to create a a width
of people who
share the same principles and same ideas
it's very very important
people say why do we have to do crack
work three times in a chair and i say
because
that's plastic ducts have power that you
can't
i'm imagine do something that
another clown did 2 000 years ago
are we ready
whatever
[Applause]
[Music]
thank you so much for stopping by
in the back church
as we say
in spanish and again this will be this
is now part of this history here if you
are part of this liberal
thank you very very much
[Music]
nobody's nobody's ever said if the wine
that jesus made was any good you know
in fact it's not so good
again
what the fish
the fish yeah and bread
there's a supermarket there
thank you very very much for coming
[Music]
okay
uh
hello everyone
hello
[Music]
yes
oh
[Music]
quack
thank you
[Music]
okay
adios
it's very close
[Applause]
so usb
also in the
in the bag there's another one
[Applause]
the bag that you have in the
but shower
the little one is a little square it
says hdmi on one side
okay
perfect
hey we are headed now
we are headed now to the
uh
and we arrived there pretty much
[Applause]
this way
all right i'm gonna mute for a little
while i'm gonna keep the video on
because we're not uh
singing right now but when we start
singing i am gonna unmute
yep okay
i was wrong we started singing
[Music]
is
i
[Music]
hey
okay
[Music]
[Applause]
foreign
[Music]
[Applause]
my
foreign
[Music]
from
[Applause]
[Music]
i uh
[Applause]
hey
[Music]
oh
me
he did
and that simple description really
described his approach to life who was
that rare academic
was that rare academic who believe that
ideas were not just for contemplating an
ivory tower but they found their truest
meaning when put into practice
unlike so many others in the academy
they're increasingly married in the
scope of what they can consider
of what they can consider because of the
nature of academic specialization david
was never subject to the captivity to
the camp of the universe he had a
brilliant
far and wide and synthesizing ideas
[Music]
okay she needs to do mirror display and
make it 1080 by 1920.
just to set for the
1920 by 1920 by or or she can set what
this
or she can set
unlike so many others in the academy who
are increasingly narrowed in the scopes
okay
i'm right there
[Applause]
thank you
[Music]
everything is fine
hey
paco can you do me a favor
hold this and i just film everything
because this is going into the chat
are okay streaming to david's friends
all right
glad to be here with the stop shopping
choir
we've been
singing stop shopping across madrid
pride
now we just arrived here
at the scene of the memorial
[Music]
um
oh
[Music]
yes
so apparently
hello madrid
madrid tell us what's going on
we have some feedback issues
and we're going to solve it in five
minutes so just give us five minutes
should we hold tight and wait for you
i think that's the idea
there's always hassle with live events
yeah
so just so everyone knows we're
recording this
yeah they're recording great
testing
you guys hear us
yeah we can hear you okay so we will get
rid of the feedback okay can you hear us
yes beautifully you guys sound beautiful
uh
yeah
so
the only thing is that uh for people who
come into the zone
with who are on the chat or try to do
explosion of sounds
can you hear us madrid hello yes we hear
you perfectly amazing
do you want to kick us off then
okay
so
because i'm afraid to talk about it
uh
is
[Music]
can you hear me
you're a little bit quiet so if you
speak quite loudly because i think
you're far away
sound now
sounds good
i'll go the next thing is microphone
so
we planned
for the david memorial a public art
project
a chalk mural to combine a street future
painting and online online assembly of
the people worldwide
we call it visual assembly
uh later clive uh russell who completely
organized that
will describe what we try to do
and we applied for permit from madrid
city governments through respectful art
institutions many times for months and
at the end we got rejected so all what
we put now is uh was done in a couple of
days
so apparently it's dangerous to
um you're not desirable to paint with
the chalk on the street and sleep in the
public squares
so we change our plans
um rearrange everything and
uh it looks like we got to present from
uh madrid government because uh instead
of doing doing art projects that's
you know we can do any time and we will
do this because it's important and
that's what we do instead of that we
will talk
and we will concentrate on politics
so
500 years ago
started
colonialism and expansion to latin
america and uh
uh here the civil war was lost to the
fascists
and now on the 10th anniversary of
occupy wall street it is a perfect time
to talk about why so often the promise
of care and protection end up with
oppression
so dedicated used to say that
prisons claim to take care of their
inmates
they provide them with housing foods
even medical attention yet which is the
worst place to be
while mothers take care of their kids
to let them play
prisons is here to punish and control
then his father
fought in civil
spanish civil war
david's mom was a refugee from russian
empire in the times of pogroms
ruth grader was also a friend of the
activist singer woody garcia
the legacy of the gregor's family is
connected so much to this country
anarchists and anti-fascist movements
and it's worth talking about why
um
why uh in this
in this times what should we do so if
david will be with us he
he would just say okay this guy all talk
and let's figure out how to save the
world because the world is becoming a
dangerous place
so now i pass over to
things
it was a long time friend of david who
directly introduced me to him and
yeah and then we will have uh open mic
and street dinner and my dream people
will come this week later most of them
because it's uh working time and siesta
here so stay with us for open mind mike
and yeah then you'll be more more fast
offline
thank you nika and and thank you so much
for organizing uh today it's amazing
thing having you guys there in madrid
and being able to see you and first of
all having all these great people who
are here to speak about about david and
about how we move forward um so we'll
have just under an hour of um
contributions from uh from names people
and then an open mic afterwards at
wherever you are in the world that
starts at the next hour
so the first person i'd like to invite
speak and if everybody can try to keep
their contributions to under five
minutes so we can get everybody in
um is uh sean antonio mendes rodriguez
from japan mexico
here on the zoo
or no are you in madrid with
with everybody
with the procession
who you're after again james
i was after
uh antonio mendez rodriguez
who i think is with there there he is
you can unmute
so we can hear
here
good evening here where we are is
evening
or
wherever you are maybe morning or night
is
[Music]
i feel a little nervous because i didn't
know the history of the of the company
who we are like honoring tonight today
i apologize for that
i think we might have lost embargo
i believe that if there's something that
united saw uh all the people
in mexico existed
in mexico there exists the idea that
death is celebrated
where we actually celebrate is life
departing from the memory that we have
of people
in
[Music]
and
a few years ago the companies and
companies
they released a text that you could
search for
called
la flor de la
la flor de la palabra
[Music]
and i bring i bring it to bring it now
because it is a text that talks about
all the people who are no longer with us
but then now us are the extension of
their worth
the text says more or less something
like
the the word of the flower won't die
who names the flower today
[Music]
all of us here now we have a word
the text is really long but now i would
like to get to what i want to say
[Music]
uh
i think we're losing
you've disappeared
okay while we wait for them to come back
i'm going to ask um if jeremy corbyn
will say a few words
so so yeah i'm we're talking about words
speaking okay
we can hear you now yeah sorry jeremy
okay
so it is important to think about the
word words that we want to leave when we
go
[Music]
all
and sometimes
because only when we are alive we have
the power to speak and sometimes which
we speak without helping those who are
coming after us
and i say that because i am from uh
originally
indigenous people
from mexico because that's where i am
from
okay
in
and we have very present and uh and on
our upbringing we have very clear that
life is gonna go on beyond
[Music]
and it has nothing to do with whether
we're going to have children or not or
family or not it has to do with the fact
that life goes on goes on without us
so we are responsible for that future
and we need to think what word do we
want to live what is the word that we
want to give and um
the future that we want to inherit
entonces
florida
so when we speak about the word of the
flower we are speaking about we're
talking about our desire our heart
and and well
and the future that we want to build
i think i'm extending a little bit yes
[Music]
i just wanted to thank you
muchas gracias for
[Music]
and now i'm meeting you and
and i'm knowing new people and all of
you and here we are now even even though
it's uh on a distance
um
can we have now please jeremy corbyn
dana can you um
unmute jeremy please
thank you james
thank you very much for inviting me on
to this call i will keep to less than
five minutes because clearly a lot of
people
want quite rightly to pay tribute to
david and nika thank you so much for
inviting me and laura to attend this and
to speak at this event because uh
it's hard to believe that this time has
passed since david went away from us and
i just want to say thank you to you and
to james and so many others
for what you've done to commemorate
david's life but also a huge thank you
to david for his solidarity he gave me
many times during my period under
enormous pressure from
right-wing media and many other sources
in this country and indeed in this world
david had this amazing imagination an
imagination to challenge the
economic norms to promote the occupy
movement to empower people and to reach
across
those that were committed anti-racist
fighters that were committed
environmentalists but also committed to
representing workers often in very
difficult industries and quite polluting
places so david had this imagination
that could bring people together and
make the economic alternatives to
free market capitalism to greed to
overconsumption to damage the
environment something that was
understood and popular and so
david may not have left behind huge
amounts of physical achievements in
reality very few of us do what he left
behind was a message of imagination and
of hope and look at the people that are
on this call together
we just heard
on behalf of the indigenous peoples of
mexico and indeed indigenous peoples of
many other parts of the world that david
spoke up for just as much he spoke up
for the oppressed of inner-city britain
what david did was inspired and change
minds
and if you've changed minds and given
inspiration then you've actually laid
the seeds for a long-term much more
hopeful much more participatory future
for all of us nika james thank you very
much for putting on today and in david's
memory
let's do that work let's do that work to
bring about an environmentally
sustainable world which means
challenging the concept of eternal
growth and eternal growth in consumption
because you can't have that and
environmental sustainability at the same
time david knew that and understood that
and it's up to all of us to learn his
lesson but above all the wonderful
brilliant open mind that he had
i'm not surprised that woody guthrie was
a family friend it kind of all fits
together david thanks so much nika
thanks so much james thank you for
hosting today's event
thank you so much jeremy thank you
um
now we're going to
can we have astra taylor please astra
are you there
i am can you all see me yeah see okay
seeing hearing okay great i just want to
echo everyone's thanks it's really an
honor to be here thank you nika
thank you everyone um
a few days before david passed away i
got what would be my last text from him
we were trying to figure out a time to
talk and he said no idea of time time is
being reinvented
and for our friend david everything was
reinventable our economy our society our
values ourselves and even apparently
time itself
and i was thinking about how time was
different with david i went through our
correspondence after he passed away i
was struck by how instantaneously we
became friends a single coffee in the
west village in 2009 was all it took and
that was just
how david operated i don't think i was
particularly unique
there was an openness about him a
willingness to let people in
and you know given how prolific he was
as a writer incredibly prolific he
obviously spent a lot of time reading
and in the solitude of writing
um but he was also
incredibly gregarious and always up for
a phone call or for gossip for a walk
around an antique market and that
sociability fed into his activism
in august of 2011 david sent me an email
trying to get me to go to the planning
meetings of what would become occupy
wall street he basically said look this
is a lot of fun for geeks like me
and i i didn't make it to those planning
meetings but i went the first day
and i remember how pleased david was at
zucconi park and he was like this
radical maitre d like welcoming us into
the space and checking on our progress
as we had these democratic assemblies
and david you know he didn't push me
into the occupy movement but he kept
opening these doors for me and i kept
walking through them
and i became more and more involved and
more invested and soon he wrote me into
uh a movement focused on and it came out
of occupy a movement focused on the
problem of debt
and one of our opening salvos was a
propaganda video featuring a dozen of
our friends in balaclavas dancing around
a burning trash can lighting their debt
notices on fire
and david is you know there among the
throngs dancing and he wrote this
communique style voiceover and i just
want to read a few lines he wrote we
ultimately understand that to be able to
take care of our children our friends
our families the people we care about is
a value that no accountant can ever
measure that no government loan
administrator or hedge fund manager can
ever have the right to take away from us
every dollar we take from a fraudulent
subprime mortgage speculator every
dollar we save from a collection agency
is a tiny piece of our own lives that we
can give back to our communities to
those we love and respect and for david
the debt resistance movement he helped
inspire was all about love and over time
it's grown into a proper organizing
effort in the us you know my friends and
many of us have carried the torch and
we've erased because of david we've
helped you raise billions and billions
of dollars of debt for people across
this country
uh and that's just one of the many
things that he helped ignite
david as we all know he had very strong
views but he wasn't dogmatic he wasn't a
sectarian i'll never forget a public
conversation we had in 2019 where he
talked about the pleasure of changing
your mind right like were you he said it
was a form of political happiness like
oh i can think differently right i can
think something else
and david's conviction that our minds
could be changed that our society could
be changed
you know was was empirically based in
his work as an anthropologist and just
you know he was a curious person right
so he was aware that human society's
value systems can vary wildly
across space across time and the very
often the stories we tell ourselves or
the stories we're told about the way
things are just aren't true
that
all of these arrangements all these
social arrangements political
arrangements can be transformed right
but here's the last thing i want to the
point i want to make home is that david
knew that you can't change those things
alone right so you can write a brilliant
best-selling book like debt
which expands readers minds but really
that's no substitute for social
movements for collectivities for
rebellions for riots
and when david was in that mode of being
an activist he had this extraordinary
humility he was a peer among his equals
and i i think i he seemed the most happy
to me just sitting in a meeting you know
in a church basement
and i really respected him for that just
how much he embodied his principles in
those spaces he despised affectation and
abhorred hierarchy even one that would
put him at the top
so david may not be with us in person
anymore but his perspective remains
extremely vital his insistence on seeing
things differently on siding with the
underdogs on engaging people as an equal
and challenging the pompous and the
powerful finding joy and keeping that
utopian horizon in sight
so i think we need to channel david's
astonishing and heartfelt faith in his
fellow human beings and refused to lose
sight of the possibility not necessarily
inevitability of our collective
liberation so thank you for having me
and thank you david you wouldn't like us
to owe you a debt but um definitely if
we can pay it back it's by continuing
the struggle that you're part of
amazing thank you so much astra
um can i ask anton newcombe
to to speak next and also anton you're
tilted that way around i don't know if
you can turn yourself around
yeah brilliant thanks
um
hello everybody um thank you nikki for
bringing everybody together and
continuing to honor
david's work and
keep some of those bonds between people
that knew him
and his work
alive i think it's very admirable it's
really interesting that this falls on 10
years of occupy
and also the
fall equinox you know
it's like a harvest time and
a time things start to die but also on
the other side of the hemisphere of that
it's springtime
and you've got all this life going on
and uh
i would just like to talk briefly um you
know
one of
when you think about these
occupy
and the things that were that people
were trying to accomplish i mean what
little i understand um
it's
most people involved i mean not
everybody would be completely shocked
how things have multiplied
since those issues have multiplied in
these 10 years i mean
we have individuals publicly now that
have
almost have almost a trillion
dollars
you know and france is arguing with
australia about 90 billion and it and
bezels could just burp that out it
wouldn't even faze him
they're like oh this is like a big deal
to our economy you know and it's just
like such a mad world now but what more
important
importantly is
you know i see activists and different
people people i really love
sometimes online they're so frustrated
we face all these problems and they kind
of like
lash out at other people that
want to be
feel like they're doing something
or
involved in being on the right
direction or team and
sort of chastising them saying you're
not doing anything you're just like
looking at people online and that's just
like
this this frustration this outrage
because
it's completely overwhelming so when i
think about david's work and i think
about him
as an individual the one thing that i
really from the times that i spent with
him and talked with him
and then just
watched him
is how how
his middle attitude was pretty positive
about the things he was dealing with
even when it was really serious whether
it was when he was supporting uh
the fighters in syria it was outrage
after outrage and betrayal after
portrayal of real serious business and
stuff i just think his positive mental
outlook was really helpful
i think and and i think the one thing
that uh
you might not be able to grasp
all of his academic skills right you
might not be at the same
speed
up to the same speed level as him
maybe processing information
or spitting it back out but
you can learn something from that
that that real positivity about what
you're doing
you know and and and i want to
remind keep reminding myself of that
because it is overwhelming and like my
other friend in america she gets so mad
at everybody and i just see what happens
when you don't have that positivity
because she's so right on she's so smart
she's just like sharp is attacked
but it's just
she's 100 percent angry
and she it's justified right but it
maybe it's not the best thing because
really in inside this person is somebody
who really does want to see change
you know
so
i hope that um
i'm looking forward to listening to
everybody and i am really super thankful
that we all are taking a minute to honor
his life and uh each other
and uh thank you
thank you anthony
just said in the chat we need the joy i
think that's completely right
um
could we have steve keane uh dana can
you um
unmute steve and and spotlight him
sorry receive one second
dana can you unmute steve
that should be right now is that correct
brilliant there we go okay thank you
i'm i'm not i'm not used to being
preceded by speeches that make me think
i'm not going to do as well but that's
already happened three times um
it's and it's something which um i've
you have to be both personal and
analytical about david um i wrote a bit
of a speech i'm going to ramble around
parts of it um
because this obviously is is far more
well known
it's much a personal thing as it is
intellectual this is uh a person we all
admired and loved
and his loss was very hard to take
and um
i wrote
i managed to escape covered by traveling
to thailand from the uk and the
netherlands and i saw what a disastrous
job they were doing which is a very good
decision last year and not so crashlot
this year but still i think i've come
out ahead
and therefore i evaded the worst of 2020
and i was effectively being a spectator
um
and then i was i'm sorry
then i was in a chat with some
mathematics colleagues pulling apart the
garbage that passes for neoclassical
economics as analysis of climate change
and i suddenly saw a message
i think from stacy herbert
uh saying that david had died
and um
i was just in shock and i wrote later
that
this was like 2020 saying you think you
managed to avoid this well no you didn't
here's your dose of 2020. so it was very
shocking and a great loss
both intellectually and personally
i want to go to to why david was so
important to me intellectually and that
is that economics tries to pretend that
it's the hard science of the social
sciences and it basically rubbishes
anthropology but if you learn economics
as well as i have you know it's built on
myths uh they disguise it with what
appears to be mathematics to people who
aren't trained in mathematics but it's
so bad when you take a look at it i
actually call it mythematics not
mathematics
and in that sense anthropology in
david's hands was the true
hard science of the of the social
sciences because you actually looked at
and reacted to the evidence and i want
to work with my favorite uh part of what
i call the book of debt um so bear with
me if i go a bit too long here but this
is some extracts from david's
discussions of the the myth of barter in
mainstream economics he says the economy
is where we indulge in our natural
propensity to truck and barter and we're
still trucking and bartering we always
will be money is simply the most
efficient informed means in madagascar i
david had the privilege of interviewing
uh calenoro a tiny ghostly creature that
a local spirit medium claimed to keep
hidden away in a chest at home but all
it wanted to talk about was money
i finally asked so what did you use for
money back in ancient times when you
were still alive
the mysterious voice immediately replied
no we didn't use money in ancient times
we used to barter commodities directly
one for the other
and david says the story is everywhere
even in madagascar
people can't imagine any other way that
money might have come about but he said
the problem is there's no evidence that
it ever happened an enormous amount of
evidence that it never did
for centuries explorers have been tried
to find this fabled land of bada none
with success
and the economists on the other hand
live with their myths so adam smith made
a myth about aboriginal north america
and by the middle of the 1850s late 18th
century in the 19th century pardon me
louis
morgan's description of life in the
iroquois was available and that made it
clear that the main institution were
long houses where goods were allocated
by women's councils and no one ever
traded our heads for slabs of meat
economists simply ignored this
information mr jevins who was one of the
founders of neoclassical economics took
his example straight from smith with
indian swapping as venison for elk and
beaver heights and made no use of actual
descriptions of indian life that made it
clear that smith had simply made this up
now i wish that david was only talking
effectively about classical economics
and 250 years ago but the same nonsense
is alive on steroids today and i'll just
give you an idea of that from a paper
i've just been pulling apart that
allegedly was uh
now it was economists estimating what
would be the impact of all the major
tipping points in the climate being
tipped so arctic summer i see ice gone
greenland gone west antarctic gone amok
gone no mild stream keeping the uk warm
and the europe warm
even the perm the permafrost gone and
metal hydrates disappeared they said
that would cause it a 1.4 percent fall
in gdp compared to what it would have
been in the complete absence of climate
change
now how did they get that nonsense
conclusion part of it was assuming that
damages were simply a square the square
of time so two
of temperature increase so two degrees
was four times as bad as one and three
degrees was nine times as bad and that's
rising but it's very very gradual and
they multiply it by a parameter which
made it not t squared but
0.00227 times t squared meaning 10
degrees of increase
would only add eight yeah so
what david identified the myths they
live with the myths they continue to are
still there and we should honor david by
getting rid of neoclassical economics
fantastic
thank you so much steve it's a
i mean we really really should
um
next is uh molly crabapple there
uh yes i'm here
cool
i'm just
trying to pin you
oh yeah here we go great molly you've
got the you've got the floor
thank you so much nika for inviting me
to be here and um
i want to say what an honor it is to
talk about david someone who
was a constant inspiration to me and a
constant inspiration to all of us
so many people have said so many
brilliant things about his work with
occupy about you know his intellectual
contributions about the fierce
solidarity that he always had with
anyone who was an underdog
anyone who is being unjustly attacked
that i want to talk about
two other qualities about him
i want to talk about david's generosity
and i want to talk about his sense of
mischief
david was one of the most profoundly
generous people i've ever met
and i mean this in multiple ways you
have this guy who's like this super
genius intellectual you know
anthropologist
economist who wrote
in a way that allowed any reader whether
or not they had ever been to school
whether or not they had ever gotten some
fancy degree or ever you know been in
some elite circle any reader could see
themselves you could see their problems
in his work i have friends who worked at
call centers who
after they read jobs they
suddenly
found someone expressing the sort of
visceral dread they felt going into work
every day and wasting the precious
irreplaceable moments of their lives
when i think about his generosity too i
think about this time that i
hung out with david on portobello road
he loved you know antique shopping as
astra said and when he walked those
streets he was friends with every single
type of people like every single you
know working-class guy at a stall you
know
david knew and david shared a story with
and i remember there was this this book
this copy of the arabian nights that i
loved and i was i was too broke to buy
and he just like he just bought it for
me like out of the blue you know because
he he liked giving gifts he liked
giving gifts he liked getting gifts he
liked that
capacity to feel joy and wonder at the
world in this most unexpected ways
now when i think about david's sense of
a mischief right
here is this you know eminent man who
had this like smile like this dorky
little boy who was seeing all of the
ridiculousness of the world all of the
pomposity all of the silliness all of
the terribleness that didn't need to be
there and he was just kind of laughing
at it and he was saying you know haha i
am smart and i can see my way out of
this trap that we've woven
ourselves into and there's something
better and more beautiful that we can
have
i think about that sense of mischief
when um he invited me to this squad once
in london that uh had a big sign in it
that was like no cops and no journalists
and i was a journalist
and um
and i i remember telling him that and
him just laughing that like little
that just laugh at the observatory of
everything
i
think about david's willingness to pick
a fight in the cause of
justice but never be embittered or
doctrinaire by it
to always keep in mind these
possibilities for a better world and to
deal with everyone with this remarkable
openness that inspired people to be
their best selves
the world is
smaller for david's loss it is smaller
it is
a loss to us all and
there is no consolation really
in that except that
i think that we need to
try to live in those ways that
he still embodied best that sense of
questioning all of the pompous bastards
that sense of mischief and of laughter
and that wild wide open generosity and
that greed for life and it's every
aspect and that's what i take from david
that's what
the reason one of the many reasons i'm
so happy and so lucky to have known him
and that is what i
hope to embody in my own life in tribute
thank you so much for for having me and
um
thank you so much you know all of you
guys
thank you molly thank you so much
um
next can we hear from david riff please
uh hi uh thanks
for having me thanks james for
moderating uh this conversation
um last year we at steida shahab's
festival invited david anika to
participate with a strange new hybrid
format they were working on together in
pandemic times that of the visual
assembly
over and over the next months
i shared some of the weird lockdown with
david and with nikon we imagined what
this project would be like
the idea was to use structural
institutional visualization tools to
rethink
somehow even from the ground up
healthcare at the time when the crisis
in care was overwhelmingly clear
and this assembly which nika's was now
trying to carry out in madrid was
planned for october 11 and it didn't
happen for obvious reasons so instead
the festival helped to organize the
memorial carnival held on that day where
we were providing this constant video
stream
um that i was then overseeing and this
was a really intense experience and one
that this zoo maybe recaptures a little
bit the spirit of this is is very much
like that and i'm really glad to be part
of it um
i guess
responding to what nika sent a little in
advance and thinking about you know
tools to fight against fascism today one
thing that i wanted to mention that
stuck in my mind while reading david's
work before i ever ever had met him or
spoken to him
um was came from the debt book the book
of debt as steve keane just said um
the section in question is one about
communism um and graber point
david points out that much of our
thinking about communism is purely
mythical so this actually ties into
the mathematics uh point that david was
that that steve was making
uh
i quote uh once upon a time uh humans
held all things in common in the garden
of eden during the golden age of saturn
in paleo paleolithic hunter-gatherer
bands then came the fall as the result
of which we are now cursed with
divisions of power and private property
the dream was that someday with the
advance of technology and general
prosperity with social revolutions
or the guidance of the party we would
finally be in a position to put things
back to restore common ownership and
common management of collective
resources
david points out that this is a story we
like to tell ourselves this is a myth
and that it's done already done enormous
damage not only an enormous amount of
good and you can only agree without even
launching into a critique of sorel or of
rosenberg or of the myths of the 20th
century worth dying for and so on
communism is not a fantastic failed epic
of ghosts and zombies ready ready to
rise from the thereafter instead he
argues in the book and i continue to
quote it's something that exists right
now something that exists to some degree
in any human society although there has
never been one in which anything uh has
been organized in that way and it would
be difficult to imagine how there could
be all of us act like communists a good
deal of the time none of that us as act
like communists consistent
so he calls this actually a a kind of
base rock a baseline communism a bedrock
of actually existing communism that's
the foundation for all human sociability
um
one always behaves he writes in a spirit
of solidarity though this then this is
the problem more with some people than
others and this means in turn the groups
define themselves by commonly held
property and sharing within the group
and that conflicts between groups or
hostility to strangers of departures
from this baseline ruptures in actually
something that's maybe even an eternal
and unquestioned basic morality so when
hospitality becomes hostility
that's when this rupture occurs he
remarks somewhere in that section noting
very finely noting the etymological
connection between the two words i was
really impressed i remember when i read
this because i thought this is wow this
is really like marx and species being
of of humanity and you know you can
really understand that actually
communism is not something fantastic or
utopian it's here in the here and now
and it's here that it's something that
can be grasped especially he notes in
that section in moments of tragedy
catastrophe or grief this is when
strangers suddenly become sisters and
brothers pulling together somehow to
make to to make life continue i don't
want to say that only emergencies can
prompt solidarity
quite on the contrary what made david's
loss so irreplaceable
is really that he was one of the few
people on the left today
who
saw that baseline all the time in every
situation at least that was my feeling
from reading him and he lived i'm
convinced that he would have further
tapped into the extraordinary potential
of associate of a sociology describing
everyday communism that's potential in
our lives so thanks for having me and
i'm sorry if this has gone on too
oh david that was fantastic thank you
thank you so much i love um
i i love how um david braver um
would talk about the communism everyday
life you know the the past me the wrench
or can i have a light i mean it's you
know as soon as
as soon as you hear that it just makes
perfect sense um thank you so next we're
going to have please um renee who's an
artist and a friend of david i'm asking
to unmute
somebody else is speaking i guess okay
here we go okay well sorry i'm just
turning the camera on the other way
i'm actually uh
in a town in armenia
a place where uh
just about a year ago
not far from here in arts off a kind of
an autonomous
armenian community in the late soviet
period basically wanted to secede from
the azeri ssr
and
they didn't recognize that kind of
plebiscites and self-determination and a
war ensued
in the in the early 90s during the
dissolution of the soviet union and
yeah thinking about the ghosts of
communism and
connecting it to somehow this struggle
of
communities to sort of determine their
own fate and uh it's interesting to
think about chiapas
in the early 90s 94 and thinking about
this struggle that happened within the
soviet union
and the difficulty in a way to find
a language
uh within a left
especially in the context of a
dissolving kind of uh union let's say of
around communism
and uh
this last fall then there was an
invasion as azerbaijan went to inside
this space and
there's a lot
of
dead young people actually you know if
you see it on that building there's
actually an image of a
i didn't plan this but uh one of the
young people from this town that that
was killed
about four
people have died from that invasion i
mean
and uh that would be like comparable to
maybe like 400 000
americans
uh in the context of population
but instead of
you know
the 44 days you know it took the us i
don't know 2 000 soldiers of over 20
years and we we see how you know the us
commemorates that death but
i think david
for me i
is
is a comrade that tried to kind of uh
think
that
impossible
kind of space
of of thinking the sort of reconciling
leftist history
with all the kind of uh limits and blind
spots and
basically the reinvention of the
different politics maybe a sense of
politics
and uh
that's a very precious kind of uh loss i
feel
um you know the
one-year passing is a very
um difficult thing in the armenian
context that it's highly commemorated so
this this month is going to be heavy
with a lot of uh commemorations
marking one year um of a lot of young
people who died especially from this
region that we're in
but i i
you know i i was thinking today how to
kind of reconcile this kind of uh the
lives of people who get lost
who have no
recognition and then friends like david
who everybody remembers
and uh
it's a difficult thing you know so but
i i wanted to just say
david seemed from what everyone has also
said
was this person who
despite his exceptionality he was also
an everyman you know
and uh that that special quality to be
uh
yeah just just involved in in everything
in the details of thinking and being
with others
it makes sense to have someone talking
at the same time right now
i didn't prepare anything like that to
speak i just wanted to be present to
where i would be today and that's where
i am and
i wish david was still with us
but i think if there's something that we
can kind of keep
alive
is this kind of search
that really confronts even the dead ends
of of whatever has been a left
and still claims
some some affinity to that struggle
towards a different way of life and a
different conception of living together
so
we miss you david but you're here with
us actually
that's it
thank you
thank you so much
um
could we have a katarina please
do you hear me
yes perfectly uh
thanks for inviting me i'm very happy to
be here
i'm from the same festival studio harps
david reef mentioned we had to make a
project last year it did not happen and
for me david greber whose work i knew
before and we talked before
will always remain an unrealized project
a kind of debt to pay
in that positive sense he
pointed out to so that that that makes
us richer so what is that is about for
me
to always see the big the big picture of
the world
which means to see how wrong is actually
how horribly wrong is the past taken
since 1960s as he writes
by nation states and us lured to it by
both left and right sometimes
um
we are um
coirs
in a world of perverse dialectics or as
david greber once wrote bizarre saddam's
acoustic dialectics where like today
it's hard to tell tell is it already
coercive political control or still
rational hygienic measures
is it
social responsibility or anxiolytic
paranoia
is it progressive support of the local
and vernacular
or is it already is it is it fighting um
progressive support of the local and
vernacular fighting big corporations or
is it already parochial resentment where
fascists typically and happily grows and
it's of a certain significance in an
austrian province where i live and work
now
is it growing awareness of surveillance
capitalism
or are these irrational conspiracy
theories invading now left as well as
right
is it that more voices are now hurt or
are we living in the world where
emotions are put in the center of
jurisdictions
is it more justice in our world or is it
that all sorts of conflicts are being
moralized and legalized now
is it that we are open to different
point of views
or any sort of ideological and
intellectual misgeneration and i know
which world i'm using
is severely punished especially if we
touch upon what is not ours by birth and
dress right
david greber is the one to look for
answers here
he's the one to read and i can only
recommend him as a feel good reasoning
like literally is the one who always
shows the lights in the tunnel and for
me in my field in arts field he actually
helps me to try to avoid what i would
call inspired by him art
art in 20th century went
like was aiming at escaping the market
and was successful in it in creation of
many non-market forms like performance
now of course commercialized but what
happened on the way that art insisted
vehemently theoretically and an activist
way that this is actually work
with a wage
instead of a production of consumer good
and that leaded art i think into a trap
of being an element of state or
corporate production machine
is like jobs where art becomes
a pr management of social issues of
sorts
so non-bullshit art would be not about
being useful but about being art about
being fictitious and funny and
accessible
and for everyone
and relevant so david grabber always
insisted we should never forget the
notion of play
and this is what is actually very
stimulating for me and with this i want
to send greetings
as well to the church of stop shopping
to billy to savitri to all who just have
been with us at our first village
tyreisha herbst
thank you very much
to grabber
to us all
thank you
katarina can i
ask
andrew springbonus to speak next
hello everybody and
it's very nice to be here thank you for
inviting me
uh i will just start with a very brief
story because uh
i've never known david in person uh
sadly and it was
renee's call renee gabriel called me up
last year in venice where i live
and
of course it was already after the sad
event
and
yeah suddenly my my relationship so to
say starts with with that event and and
it starts with
uh
asking me to
help nika actually
and
it was very strange because so i
just went out on the street and i tried
to sms nika and
and she didn't reply immediately because
she was busy and
probably under shock and then all of a
sudden
on the street next to my house i just
happened to stumble
upon a person and i stopped and i heard
her speaking russian
and
and i thought this is nika and then and
then i just spoke to her and it was her
with her kids sitting in one restaurant
next to my house and actually
yeah
quietly talking and so that's how we met
without even using the mobile phone sir
and after that of course i tried to help
with the translation so
yeah the meeting with david happened in
this very very strange
way
in in in in some of the uh in some of
the
offices where i was trying to translate
and where i had to translate something
which
i would rather
avoid uh
[Music]
prefer not to know it at all or not to
have
[Music]
like it was not really a very pleasant
thing to translate
so and ever after even though we we
stayed in touch of course with nika and
then i'm very grateful because she
kind of invited me to be part of this
enormous community here
and uh
and
so
we have participated as curators uh here
at the museum of care
and
and i hope we will be able to
collaborate and and um you know i never
known david in person i'm very happy
that we can contribute with
with our student with my students like
and and i personally have tried to
contribute as much as possible
throughout
this very bizarre year so um
yeah that's very
i'm very thankful and i hope we'll be
able to continue this collaboration i
just uh yeah
to conclude wanted to to uh read a very
very quick phrase from
[Music]
david's book the
anarchist anthology and he's speaking
about
what is revolutionary action
he's suggesting that revolutionary
action is any collective action which
rejects and therefore confronts
some form of power or domination and in
doing so
reconstitutes social relationships even
with the collectivity in that light
revolutionary action does not
necessarily have to aim to topple
governments attempts to create
autonomous communities in the face of
power
would for instance be almost by
definition revolutionary acts and
history shows us that the continual
accumulation of such acts can change
almost everything so for me
rather than to think an abstract about
what could be such acts like uh
my time and my involvement in in this
and
continuing to spread david's thought and
being involved in this
uh community and being able to
contribute is something quite concrete
that i'm doing
whenever i can and and i hope this can
also contribute to something that we can
sort of
uh
create
collectively and then through that
perhaps
create a change
that
sooner or later uh
will will occur on a greater level thank
you
thank you andrews thank you so much
um
we've just got about three more speakers
in this section before we open it up to
uh the more fluid discussion which um
jamie and maria will be facilitating um
next can we get um jacques from the from
the yes man
hello um
it's uh
it's such an honor to be invited to just
talk about david
um in his honor and a number of people
have already spoken about the spirit of
collaboration and how he embodied that
spirit
um
in
occupy wall street and where i met him
and several people did and and other
times and
how much he believed in
collaboration and how generous he he was
and i'd like to read a quote from his
forthcoming book uh the dawn of
everything
that um
shows
that talks about that which david
exemplified um collaboration cooperation
and generosity and and the way he backs
it up
over page after page after page shows
uh in
in the following the rest of the book um
i think shows his precise mind and the
way in his hands anthropology truly does
become the most exact social science
um
and i think it it gives me the feeling
that left-wing movements can achieve
marvels in a world that sometimes seems
overwhelmingly negative so here's here's
uh
here's the quote
um
what's meant by a self-conscious
political actor
is what this is about
neuroscientists tell us we spend the
overwhelming majority of our time
effectively on autopilot working out
habitual forms of behavior without any
sort of conscious reflection
when we're capable of self-awareness
it's usually for very brief periods of
time the window of consciousness during
which we can hold a thought or work out
a problem tends to be on average
roughly seven seconds
uh
what neuroscientists and it must be said
most contemporary philosophers almost
never notice however
is that the great exception to this is
when we're talking to someone else in
conversation we can hold thoughts and
reflect on problems sometimes for hours
on end
this is of course why so often even if
we're trying to figure out something by
ourselves we imagine arguing with or
explaining it to someone else human
thought is inherently dialogic ancient
philosophers tended to be keenly aware
of all this that's why whether they were
in china india or greece they tended to
write their books in the form of
dialogues
humans were only fully self-conscious
when arguing with one another trying to
sway each other's views or working out a
common problem
true individual self-consciousness
meanwhile was imagined as something that
only a few wise sages could perhaps
achieve through long study exercise
discipline and meditation
what we'd now call political
consciousness was always assumed to come
first
in this sense the western philosophical
tradition has taken a rather unusual
direction over the last few centuries
around the same time as it abandoned
dialogue as its typical mode of writing
it also began imagining the isolated
rational self-conscious individual not
as a rare achievement something
typically accomplished if at all after
literally years of living isolated in a
cave or monastic cell or on top of a
pillar in the desert somewhere but
there's the normal default state of
human beings anywhere which i guess
economists would recognize as the
rational actor that's completely
mythological
even stranger over the course of the
18th and 19th centuries it was political
self-consciousness that european
philosophers came to see as some kind of
amazing historical achievement as a
phenomenon which only really became
possible with the enlightenment itself
and the subsequent american and french
revolutions before that it was assumed
people blindly followed traditions or
what they were
or what they assumed to be the will of
god
even when peasants or popular rebels did
rise up to try to overthrow oppressive
regimes they couldn't admit that they
were doing so but convinced their own
selves that they were restoring ancient
customs or acting on some kind of divine
inspiration
to victorian intellectuals the notion of
people self-consciously imagining a
social order more to their liking and
then trying to bring it into being was
simply not applicable before the modern
age and he goes on to
describe um how indeed rich the history
of people coming up with new social
orders
um
is
and it's just i think it's a beautiful
passage and a beautiful book and and
embodies his
the the
the kind of thought that he or expresses
the kind of thought that he embodied the
generosity and um
i'm so glad to
to still have him with us in many ways
and uh i feel his presence every time i
feel hopeful so thanks david
thank you jack and yeah i absolutely
agree every time every time there is
hope david is there
um can we have uh having please
yes uh hello james and hello everybody
else who have already contributed and
will and thank you nika and james uh for
inviting me to take part in this
memorial
we are so honored that we have known
david
that he has become a part of us while we
have all become a part of him
at the time of david's loss nico called
me from venice and i immediately went
there
however i'm
unable to be there today in madrid
physically
today is the first year that our
struggles continue without david's
physical presence
it is hard to believe a year has gone by
without him
but i must say that he has been with us
every step of the way his loss has
certainly been untimely for us all that
we feel each day
our commemoration is by way of realizing
the desire for a free and equal world of
the thousands of people who fell in
struggle
including and especially david
if there was one thing about our friend
david that stood out it was his
insistence on seeing things differently
he was able to bring things together in
absolutely novel ways
and
he shed new light to phenomena that we
took for granted
his unmatched creativity led him to
extend over different disciplines and
time periods
and i guess this is where the kurdish
freedom movement and david
thought alike and came together
david was a revolutionary and visionary
without a doubt
be it in the context of occupy wall
street or the revolution in kurdistan
especially in rojava
whenever the oppressed were trying to
take things into their own hands and
build something new
david was there to support these efforts
whether through theory or through direct
action
and while doing this he took on the
world and if need be the whole left
this could be seen in his different way
of approaching the kurdish people
more than six years ago david said for
the rajava revolution no this is a
genuine revolution and he entered into
indirect dialogues with abdullah
through his essay on the political
philosophy of java
in his essay he said
academics
are not only expected to avoid
engagement with politics one form this
takes is the refusal
to believe that anyone who has taken any
sort of effective political action in
the world can also make important
contributions to human thought
at best they can be an object of
analysis they cannot be seen as engaging
as equals in the development of ideas
it is hardly surprising then that
contemporary intellectuals for the most
part have no idea what to do with the
ideas of abdullah
david was the kind of activist
revolutionary intellectual that our
world urgently needs
he not only had a kind heart but a sound
intellect
and he was still able to resist the
academic world uniformity
and to take on issues that may not have
been popular
raima and i began to know david since
2012 when he came to talk about debt in
germany
that had so much in common with the
journal and writings we just had to meet
him and our interaction became more
profound as we visited rojava together
in the conferences of challenging
capitalist modernity in hamburg
other seminars in the uk and our
discussions for museum of care
earlier in 2018 we were there where you
are right now in madrid together with
nasa and andre to talk about the
revolutionary ideas of the kurdish
freedom movement
there we also visited a museum that
exhibited the struggle against fascism
david was very proud of his father for
his solidarity and struggle against
fascism in spain
david continued the tradition he was
part of and supported
radical movements
that changed our lives for the better
kurds arabs assyrians armenians and
other peoples in the regions have
demonstrated that the only way out of
the existence existing quagmire
is solidarity and the freedom of women
and of peoples
the freedom of one is the freedom of the
other they have dealt a heavy blow to
the dark ages and fascism that isis the
taliban al-qaeda and the turkish state
among others hoped to unleash in the
middle east
in the process they have shown the
possibility of a path out of the crisis
to another a brighter future based on
women's freedom and ecological economy
and a democratic society
inspiring and giving hope to millions
around the world
david had yet much to contribute at this
critical juncture of human history
as a brilliant because he was a
brilliant anthropologist
intellectual anarchist activist a friend
of the revolution in kyrgyzstan and an
important
person with unique capacities for
producing meaning
he is missed by all of us
but i have to say david lives on in our
struggles in kurdistan
and wherever there is free human spirit
i thank you for this time and as i said
he will live on with us
thank you
thank you so much
now we're going to turn to uh our last
speaker in this section so we'll have a
debbie book chip in and after she speaks
we'll go to uh madrid
and to the zapatistas and anika before
um we have the the open mic session so
debbie if you could unmute
thank you so much james and thank you
nika and thank you everybody who's
spoken and who is still to speak so
eloquently about david
you know david used to say that
anarchism was not his identity but
rather something he did
and that simple description really
described his approach to life
so many people have also already spoke
about his remarkable playful finale and
he know that rare academic who believed
that ideas were not just for
contemplating in an ivory tower
but that they found their truest meaning
when put into practice
unlike so many others in the academy who
are increasingly
narrowed in their scope of what they can
consider because of the nature of
academic specialization
david was never subject to the kant of
the university he had a brilliant and
plastic mind
he ranged far and wide in synthesizing
ideas
and the ideas were really for him the
basis of building a new enchanted life
in which we could all be free and equal
so i want to focus for a moment on one
of the areas that he and i worked
particularly closely together on
rojava
and why he thought it was so important
that those of us living in the west
not only pay close attention to the
radically democratic project there
but support it with every ounce of
energy we could summon
as an anthropologist david had a
particularly keen understanding of how
special the multi-ethnic egalitarian
society being built in rojava really is
especially with regard to women's
liberation and the fact that in rojava
women really do play an equal role in
running every aspect of society from the
political to the economic to the social
as an activist he knew how much
education
patience and understanding it takes to
really put the ideals of direct
democracy into practice just as
anarchism is not something you simply
believe in but rather something that you
do
david believes that as activists we must
actively support our sisters and
brothers around the world as they
struggle to bring new
worlds into being
his father kenneth fought for the
republican the spanish revolution of
1936. david was so proud of his father's
activism and it was an example that
david lived by
as witnessed by his close relationship
to rojava which he not only visited more
than once
but also wrote about continuously
that spirit of internationalism that so
infused david's thinking
is unfortunately disappearing from great
parts of the left today
we've narrowed our interests so much
that the vision of a worldwide united
working class what we might perhaps in
david's world's words call a united 99
percent that animated the
internationalism of socialist and
anarchist movements of the past
it's been forgotten by many on the left
especially in the united states the
country of david's birth
elements of the left are so preoccupied
with the west's history of imperialism
that they've lost the forest for the
trees and failed to see
that in syria for example the presence
of a small number of american troops
far from being imperialist
is preventing a much more throwing
imperialist power that of turkey
from crushing the most important project
in self-governance of this century the
kurdish-led autonomous administration of
north and east syria also known of
course as rojava
in the united states the situation is so
serious
that a new elected so-called progressive
to the united states congress jamal
bowman has introduced a resolution to
remove the few hundred
american troops remaining in syria
as some of you may have seen in recent
news reports this is a move that would
benefit two people
russia's vladimir putin
who is actively trying to gain hegemony
in the region and the authoritarian
turkish ruler erdogan who is profoundly
threatened of course by the egalitarian
women-led society of rojava just across
the border from his turkey
the fact that bowman has received
campaign donations from eight members of
the turkish american national steering
committee makes this legislation even
more egregious
if david were alive today i know he
would be urging all of us to do
everything we can to make our voices
heard in opposition to this dangerous
reactionary and unnuanced approach to
foreign policy
as he said many times to me
we have in rojava as with the zabatistas
in chiapas a living breathing hope for a
better future for all of us
if we don't care deeply as david and his
father kenneth did about our brothers
and sisters
in far-off lands who are fighting for
the same values as we are
then we are not really the left
libertarians
that we think of ourselves as in the
true tradition of international
solidarity
the beasts movements supposed to embody
it's time for us to carry david's values
forward in our everyday lives to
actively stand with the people of rojava
and everywhere who need our help but in
this case by pressing our leaders to
curb turkey's aggression and to give
this region the political recognition it
deserves and a seat at the negotiating
table the future of syria
do it to honor david's memory do it
because it's the right thing to do do it
because if we do not we potentially lose
one of the very few models we have today
of a non-sectarian left libertarian
society one that offers the inspiration
that we all desperately need to keep
pushing forward with our own dreams of a
better world
do it because david isn't here to do it
for us
thank you
thank you so much debbie
and i think that's a absolutely
wonderful way to
uh conclude this bit of of the day
celebrations in the days assembly and
um in light of uh
what debbie said about the you know the
the need to have
an internationalist perspective i think
it's
you know fitting that we're handing back
over now to
uh our friends in in madrid and our
zapatista friends who are there as well
and i hand it over back to nikah
you need to unmute there we go
russell who is uh the author of the
extension rebellion design one of the
office and my partner for the visual
assembly uh the gingers uh we'll speak
after that
hey so hi
hi so many friends here thanks for being
here thanks for all that you said and
shared and taught us today
i'm savatri i live in new york city i'm
proud to call it my hometown it was
david's hometown and we were lucky to
see him when he came through
he really does make us proud to be new
yorkers i think
and operated from that position so much
we're going to sing a song that was
written uh by the um general assembly
the writing group of the general
assembly at occupy wall street it's the
the opening statement of that document
created at occupy wall street and this
is for you david we miss you we miss
seeing you at meetings we always have a
chair for you at every meeting you made
us laugh we made it easier to be there
you made it easier to go in the street
and you explained what we were doing to
us in a way we never understood
[Music]
occupy wall street and liberty
occupy public space
create a process
solutions
[Music]
democracy
we
[Music]
to the people of the world
to the people of world
[Music]
shut it down
uh
i have to
[Music]
um
okay
all right uh so uh hello everyone it's
spain hello all the amazing people have
just been speaking
and hello all the uh people who are
following this amazing event
um we've got one very special speaker
who's going to open up this
section of this
what is it an event an adventure this
section of the adventure all right we'll
go into it's occupied folks so we're
gonna have we're gonna we're gonna start
talking with each other obviously it's
all about hearing everyone's voices
and we're gonna have someone um give a
talk first before we we go off with that
but before then
just one more massive thank you to all
the people
who were speaking there was some lovely
stuff that was said right from the
beginning the gentleman speaking from
japan who was talking about word as
flower
and that's what we leave and then so
many of you were quoting david's flowers
there's a field of flowers out there
that he's left for everybody and it was
a brilliant thing to hear
and the other thing that came through
from everybody was humility and joy
humility is such a pre-requisite for
being handy and everyone who knows david
knows that he had such deep humility
and um astra described
david bringing her down to occupy and
showing her around with such joy
and i remember showing him around the
pink boat of extinction rebellion when i
met nika first she was there
same joy he was
like a kid in a candy shop okay joy is
so important and and that man had it in
spades
okay now with humility
and occupy all right with humility and
occupy we have another great gentleman
here billy who is going to be part of
the procedures later but when he arrived
in occupied london
the great billy reverend billy when he
arrived in occupy london he said right
where's the kitchen he came straight
from prison the boneyard in new york
flew over here went straight to saint
paul's cathedral we welcomed him and he
was very gracious just him on his own
with his knapsack and he said right
where's the kitchen and we all thought
he was hungry
he went straight to the kitchen put all
his stuff down and did washing up for
three hours that was his entry to the
camp now that sounds tiny but it says
everything because humility is
everything
all right so
it's a real pleasure to be inviting to
speak um before we open up this next
section
laura
who we very rarely hear from but who is
the stronger shadow partner of jeremy
himself so laura would you like to take
the microphone and
please give your memories of of david
and what message that you want to pass
on
are you there yes
thank you jamie
and thank you nika it is a great honor
that you invite me to speak
to safety
few words about david
so
as i say there is
so much i could say about david but i
can think of no one better than him
so let's hear in his words about
an event he felt passionately about and
that is even more important today
the curriculum blockade was inspired
by a call from indigenous groups in
south america
i think that echo is finished laura try
try again
yeah okay
sorry
and
the the curtain blockade was inspired by
a call for indigenous groups in south
america tied to the climate justice
action network a new global network
created in the lincoln
actions in copenhagen in december 2009
for a kind of anti-columbus day
in honor and defense of the earth yet it
was carried out in the shadow of a much
anticipated announcement later the cuts
to the total remains of the british
welfare estate from benefits to
education
threatening to throw hundreds of
thousands into unemployment and
thousands already unemployed
into the situation the largest such cut
since before the greatest depression
the great question on everyone's mind
was
will be
there on a cataclysm reaction even worse
was there any possibility
there might not be in france it has
already begun
french climate camps had long begun
planning a similar blockade at the total
refinery across the channel in the
harvard when they arrived in the 16th
they discovered the refinery already
occupied by its workers
as part of a national-wide pension
dispute
that had already shut down
16 of france's 17 old refineries
the police reaction was rebelling as
soon as the environmental activists
appeared the police leap into action
forcing the strikes back into the
refinery
and establishing accordance in an effort
to ensure that under no conditions
should the activists be able to break
through and speak
with the patrolling workers after hours
of effort
a few of cyclists did eventually manage
to break through
just over a decade ago
he wrote
environmental justice won't happen
without social justice
as world leaders prepare to gather in
glasgow next month
for cop 26
we should remember an act in davis wars
let's remember that justice and equality
go hand in hand
with caring for our mother earth
and our people
let's do it
for the great david thank you very much
thank you thank you laura very much i'm
going to pass over to
there's been a lot of uh
there's been a lot of um english being
spoken and we need to kind of keep the
fact that that's not the only language
in the world i'm passing over to um my
co-pilot in this adventure maria
um
over to you
okay hello everybody so
i'm going to invite the spanish
participants in the square
to share their impressions so far so i'm
going to speak in spanish to invite them
okay to welcome them because maybe they
don't speak english
can you show us the the square now and
the people please
if there is an interaction between us
they are shy i don't see anybody wanting
to speak or maybe
nika is there
okay maybe we can continue i don't know
we could we okay we can come come back
to the square it's a very colorful
square it looks like a 1970s prog rock
album cover at the moment that's because
of billy
um all right listen um
there is a great spokesperson who we
haven't heard from okay
and you know the visual assembly there's
an amazing moment right when when
when nika and um david met the art
department of extinction rebellion and
it was just like a you know a romance
made in
rebel heaven
um and of course they've been very that
aren't depart you know the art let's not
forget the aesthetics of extinction
rebellion was pretty cool right i mean
if it was a car we might even have
bought it for god's sake but luckily it
wasn't so so what was great to watch
that whole
idea of the kind of museum of care
explode visually by them working with
with clive and charlie and claire all
right and and a lot of this visual
assembly that the um the the fascist
prognostications of the madrid madrid
legal system has stopped but the visual
assembly really emerged once they
started talking a lot with clive charlie
and flair from extinction rebellion so
i'm now going to welcome to the
virtual stage uh clive from this ain't
rock and roll
and it's that thing about p you're on
your mic grandad grandad you you unmute
yourself
i couldn't find myself i was i was
looking at you jamie and enjoying what
you were saying
i wasn't i wasn't thinking of myself
um
so yeah just just to
go back on
um what jane was just saying there um i
was
you know amazed to finally meet david
and nika
and
we got some valuable advice from them
with extinction rebellion uh it's very
difficult to do these things and you
don't do them alone as lots of people
have mentioned
earlier today and and having a great
mind like david's
to sort of lean on was really helpful to
us
um so
you know i
i really miss him and i know plenty of
you here miss him too but anyway
i'm here to sort of try and explain what
we originally intended which is of
course something visual
so me talking about it is going to be
pretty pathetic but originally it was
called madrid cares
and that's
really because we know madrid cares
um but obviously the madrid authorities
didn't care in fact the madrid
authorities will care less
and so
i think you have a thing in madrid where
you you might you say you still have all
the good songs and we've just heard one
from reverend billy and and we may have
not won the war to get the visual
assembly on in madrid
but we still have all the good songs
and today we can still sing which is
really important
um but that's certainly not what we
imagined doing
um what we imagined
was the square at the reina sofia
the beautiful square there
filled with fluorescent yellow lines
brittling out
our sort of makeshift museum
a sort of place where we could place our
forts and then we imagined this
wonderful group of people that are
currently in madrid um
holding up an assembly in person so
online and offline
i'm with the wonderful jamie also sort
of conducting an english version online
and then also a spanish version online
with lots of people from all over the
world joining us to begin to create
something wonderful on the square itself
a sort of crazy chaotic joyous painting
across the square made of
lots of stencils created by artists from
all over the world which we've collected
together and we would love you to add to
as well and i'll give you some um sort
of email addresses yes this comes with a
call to action
so but this isn't the end for the visual
assembly because we are going to do one
and we're going to do visual assembly i
think in my hometown of london because
it's easier for us to put it on here
but also
doing it in london would also like other
people all over the world
to self-organize their own visual
assemblers as well and we can help them
do this we can give them the stencils we
can help them with a bit of technology
maybe um but we can certainly connect us
all together online and that's the
wonderful thing about being online is
that we can actually connect like we're
doing today
and
sort of
what the point of this assembly will be
we haven't quite decided yet we don't
know what we'll deliberate on
but
we will certainly have hopefully as at
least as big an audience as today
probably not as wonderful an audience
because i think you're all wonderful
people
but um
so
to cut to the quick
so we would like you to either
contribute to stencil and you can ask us
for the brief at i must get this right
so i'll look down very carefully
and take off my glasses we at
museum.care
and if you'd like
to hold a visual assembly you can
contact us at we at museum.care as well
and please do that and remember art can
be a weapon
and it can be a weapon
against a right-wing media
the surge of laissez-faire capitalism
a weapon against our
the closure of our public spaces
and in our time
a climate of climate and ecological
crisis
art really hasn't ever been as important
as it is now
and it's actually no longer good enough
to just have the good songs um we need
to win the culture war and have the good
songs
songs about care and freedom
okay clive do you want to
listen to the chat as well
yeah that's all right i'll pop it in the
chat yeah yeah brilliant okay
um
right so
we are
it's siesta time in barcelona right so
people aren't quite up yet to be in the
square and joining our carnival 1970s
prog rock band who were there right so
so what we're going to do is
start off with the assembly and um
rather than just having yet again a
middle-aged white man telling everyone
what to do i'm going to pass over to
maria to introduce this section if
that's all right maria yeah
okay so i introduced this section in
english or in spanish
or both
yeah both go and that's very
entertaining let's do that why not okay
so we are going to invite you to
to speak about the issue of care
community of care
what does a community of care look like
for example and we would like to
interact both offline and
online
if it is possible with the help of nika
or savitri whoever is there in the
square
so i don't know which order we we can
follow now uh jamie tell me what do you
think
nico go for it nika
come closer to the microphone nico come
closer to the mic okay
[Music]
um if you meet you might who are we
listening to at the moment nico what's
what's what's coming from the square
this is my face
yeah but closer to the mic closer to the
mic
are you going to speak in english or in
spanish
i'm going to speak in english i'm
actually an american
okay i'm here because i'm in exile i'm
going to make sure that we have the
right audio
oh it's all right with you okay very
good i'll be closer i have to be closer
to the mic hi everyone okay
so i want to talk a little about david i
know david from occupy uh what i was
doing in occupy was i was actually
coordinating all the media a lot water
media we're doing a lot of the live
streams from the square and also all the
video stuff and so on and we try to tell
the message from the square we're trying
to empower the folks in the square
to tell what's going on to the world
and david was obviously one of the
people who was doing a lot of the
philosophy behind our movement
so the thing about
david which is very interesting actually
a lot of speakers
touched upon this
leading up to this
is that a lot of the work david did
was not exactly
watered by the establishment even
including some institutions he worked
for
for example the way uh yale university
got rid of him
is a perfect example
uh so something interesting happened
when
when this event was being planned or
this event came together because
museums of the queen sophia of madrid
which is pretty much like the spanish
contacted nico six months ago
is that correct you correct me
so
we
explain explain what happened okay so we
conducted museums
in
our friends and they very nicely agreed
to help and they try to help us
for months like really working and
trying to do their best
pay insurance for us
and we're really kind but still we
didn't get the permission to a puzzle
and why because it's not possible okay
so different opinions
no we wasn't because it was so innocent
uh what we try to do and hopefully we
will be able to do it in london
but uh okay yeah so it's not like
but last year's this is no no there's no
permissions in madrid the thing is kind
of event the issue is that uh
we got to this event and a few days ago
we found out that the city of madrid
the government of madrid is going to ban
chalking on the street
this is why they approved a neo-nazi
parade
to the gay neighborhood went through
last weekend
so
okay
of course when
i was one of the persons who wrote the
whole list called i'm sorry if
offended anyone
but the reality is it's very interesting
actually the davis memorial
happened here
the physical part of it happened here
today
in madrid both places because madrid is
kind of like i mean aside from hungary
maybe
it's like the fascist center of europe
it is the center of gentrification i
mean the downtown madrid is destroyed
the only thing we have is tourists
carrying bags to the airbnbs
one year of beers
all the artists are gone
i mean they're still there but they're
being displaced and you have this huge
implication but it's it's on steroids
and it's basically and you have this
whole champion thing going on when
you've been like the wrestling
neighborhoods are voting for the right
wing and so on
and you have this whole effort so just
make more money blah blah blah blah blah
but you know the false capitalism this
is the tempo of it i mean not the
physical space itself the space was
offered by the community and it's one of
the last remaining amazing community
gardeners in madrid that we're actually
hosting this in
so anyway
the important thing is that this
memorial this government the fascist
government of madrid try to ban the
memory of david
and we should take that
in the sense almost as a victory
because if someone needs to try to ban
the memory that means
what he stood for
what he worked for what he accomplished
is absolutely threatening
the model
so i'll say that another thing is i'm
with new yorker
and i'm actually here in spain because
like as things turn out after occupy and
as i was doing all this other work
related to black president and so on but
u.s government decided to designate me
and my wife as terrorists and we've had
all kinds of crazy adventures right
and so one of the important things in
all of this is solidarity
and it's what i'm going to urge people
and think about it for a second that
like when you go through this kind of
struggles when you go through these
fights
it's very important when you look next
to yourself
your comrades you can count on them
so i would actually tell people to
reflect and this is why
it's kind of serious and this is no joke
you need to be able to count on people
who are next to you and if you can if
you suddenly find yourself if you're
surrounded by hypocrites or whatever
your problem so give it up anyway david
did amazing work
he
decor in the world the nine i mean that
phrase where the 99
was the ultimate like correction you
know a sentiment of unity with united so
that's like
just that by itself aside from all his
ideological work he did is a huge thing
in itself so i want to study david i
want to see all of you who came here
today
uh and
who wants to speak next
okay thank you
thanks yeah thanks vlad so much
um all right so we have we have we're
getting messages from the square about
what happens next and from all of you
about what happens next
and uh
what we're going to do is
is actually enjoy some
well you're not going to call this
entertainment
uh enjoy some inflammation inflammant
and rapture uh courtesy of the very
reverend billy billy
talon from the church of stop shopping
the man who coined the phrase reveluya
who has been drawing in
all of these thoughts and emotions
all of these memories and hopes and he's
and he's going to do what the reverend
does well over to you my friend keep it
lit
ah
jamie i'm here with my colleague
francisca benitez
[Music]
which has been mentioned off and on in
the course of this memorial to david
and there comes a point where you want
to ask david just exactly what are we
going to do there
and talking to
david's many friends
you know it is it is very easy and
powerful and and
sad and heart-wrenching
his eyes his face his voice is being
lost
very impressive and i would ask david i
would ask david
this is the 26th climate conference
unsuccessful
that pour the poisons into the
atmosphere
[Music]
they end up time and time again in the
banks that give them billions of dollars
from november
[Music]
i believe now just just gathering all
the conversations since the 90s
and the books and how the books and how
david comes through
his friends and his readers and his
students
as has happened today
here in this online memorial
i can i can hear him saying to me
what is the physical experience of the
power of these corporations
at these conferences
at least i believe that is one that is
one of the things that he would act that
that he would ask
and i i believe that
suddenly just imagining him asking me
this i start coming up with an answer i
would not have come up with by myself
[Music]
i find myself remembering that these
polluting
corporations these oil companies these
plastic companies these chemical
companies they bombard the conferences
before they take place in the weeks
running up to the conference
there are advertisements and press
releases
and reputational consultants
zero carbon by a particular date 2040
2045 2035 2050 2037 they all have zero
carbon it's the zero carbon press
release era right now
it's an example of press
releases i think that would be a phrase
that david would use
that would be my answer today but i
think that david would say well first of
all go there you're with your community
go there with the choir
parading
[Music]
against
to get to those exclusive conferences
that nobody can go to
[Music]
just the joy the singing
is
[Applause]
[Music]
democracy yeah
thank you so much from the church to
stop shopping
beautiful so um
what we're going to do look there's been
a lot of talking about you know just one
voice after another
and maria is going to introduce
what's going to be a a small assembly
small breakout assembly okay so
online we're going to be in just small
groups and marie is going to tell you
what's happening and what you're going
to be talking about it's going to be 10
15 minutes max over to you star
okay so we are going to
to
do these breakout rooms and we are going
to ask you questions about care and
freedom
so how i'm going
did we put care and freedom aside
how do you how do we bring care and
freedom back to our lives how do we
bring these values into the movement how
do we make care and freedom part of the
movement
so someone
we need someone to make
these these rooms now
from the technical assistant someone who
is the host of this song assembly please
i can i can do that maria no problem i
love the idea of being technical
assistants it's so exciting
one question is how many people do you
wish to have in each room
five maximum we were speaking about
these these are the questions i copy in
the chat
okay i will create those now
thank you
okay
[Music]
yes
okay so the questions again how do we
have care
hello
listening to the fantastic opinions
having principles
maybe we practice also the people's mind
[Music]
okay care cooperation
care cooperation
[Music]
imagine
being aware
foreign
care has to happen among each other
because we don't we can't trust
governments
[Music]
i have a
question how how do we learn
how do we care
when we don't care
[Music]
how do we learn to care
how do we grow care
um
revising and questioning our own
principles and changing them sometimes
collectively
um
in the care caring activities that have
historically fell on women that we
should be starting we should start
sharing this this scary uh
[Music]
uh
because we cannot endlessly produce
because we have limited resources but we
can endlessly care about each other
that's how we can grow and that's how we
grow
[Music]
all
remember
[Music]
anything you want to care about has to
be better for all that you know
[Music]
to utilize
radical transparency when there is a
comrade that
uh is not caring about others is using
it against
uh
when you're actually exposing
things
[Music]
from our ideals
is
um
[Music]
all these things
anyone
india
maybe other people know what radical
transparency is what do you think
radical transparency is
[Music]
something
coherence and authenticity
[Music]
to recognize something in you
that something believes in you sometimes
that you're not that you depressed that
you don't like
i
i really
did you have something else to say
no
okay
[Music]
hypocrisy people that talks in bible
from the bible
in the bible
um
until now
and nobody verbalized some public good
they grow up
[Music]
um
is
[Music]
yes
is
uh
[Music]
they bring hundreds of people working
for them
for the movement
but
they
use them
they use them for money
so they do their own association that
they don't pay people they they
take
profit
through voluntary work on vacations with
support from the government they even
got the majors something years ago
to be able to stay in the public square
who are
the ones that no one are not but they
are
[Music]
blacks
with people people do that overall
so i just encourage you to point by
medical transparency to people that are
not doing good see this person was
doing that
and many games
like by showing their production
yeah okay
okay
one more question of this one
how do we do this uh this radical
transparency
without
attacking the other with care
yeah
i'm translating for her she's saying
them
[Music]
i'm
thanks john
all right
so um
there weren't a load of breakout rooms
all right we're down to 13 people
um oh maybe we're waiting for more to
come back in
is that right john yeah okay
everyone should come back in
automatically in about 10 seconds what
usually happens if you get people to
talk to each other is that they get
terrified and run away
i know i know i know i know they had a
bit we had a bit of that okay
maybe if we hear back from maybe two or
three people just a little bit you know
why not
okay
so
we asked like
three
groups to speak
with uh with their
representative yeah
to share
yeah people just volunteer yeah yeah
okay
volunteer
yes three points three points of what
you have discussed
about these questions about
care and freedom communities of care
the politics of care the practice of
care
yeah in the square from the square
anybody from the square wants to speak
come on any volunteer
any thought about care and freedom
and the need of them
looks like it's looks like it's gonna be
for you to lead jamie
tommy i saw you take your mic off go on
go for it
that was a mistake oh my goodness mine
that might have been off this whole time
new and i had a fantastic conversation
about consciousness and how it can have
a physical effect on things and um
scientific studies that are revealing
how
you know
we we have yet to discover so much about
you know care and thought and the power
of that
and and then we went off on lots of
tangents it was a conversation it's
fantastic to meet you now
and you can fill in any detail i am
jumping thank you
uh
i
yeah i guess we were just i was just uh
telling tommy about these uh two dif two
experiments that i thought david would
have been really loved and would have
been fascinated by
and one of them involved the uh putting
a plant in the center of a dark room
and having an a random number generator
decide where a source of light would
would come and uh would shine in
different parts of the room and
technically
the number generator would just
generate random numbers so that the
light would appear random parts of the
room
but what they found out which was
astonishing was that
uh given a
a large enough sample the light would
actually
center mostly on
in the in the center right over the
plant
and so the suggestion is that something
as rudimentary as a a plant
that the plant had
basically
i wouldn't say consciousness but it
it could interact with the the outer
world in ways that
science has
yet to fully understand and to measure
and the second so that was one
experiment another experiment was that
mathematicians
have
placed like random number generators
around the world
um
to see if there was something that
that you could call a collective
consciousness and what they found was
that when there was a
major global event that these random
number of generators would actually uh
ex
demonstrate some kind of coherence
so um
i i guess the the the numbers would
kind of um
come up with a coherent pattern
and
the the first spike i think was the
death of princess diana and then the
second one was the
crash of the concord jet but the biggest
one was
during 9 11
uh where all these like random number
math uh
generators number generators actually
um
[Music]
generated a kind of i guess measurable
coherence so uh so i was just telling
him there are just all these experiments
to suggest that people are actually
connected through consciousness in ways
that science is only starting to
understand
um
and and those were just two experiments
that i know david would have loved
and uh
you know i think one can only speculate
what he would say but you know
i just uh i wish he was here to to to
actually comment on that but anyway just
to say that we're all physically
connected
uh that's uh that's a great breakout
room that you guys are in thank you
i know that
david was really a big fan of extinction
rebellion and one thing that we
were saying from the start i don't know
exactly where it came from but they were
saying that
along the lines of what you two are
discussing the potential for
human consciousness and they were saying
it's like we're sitting in front of a
violin at the moment and banging on it
with a spoon
you know so a note comes out
occasionally and everyone goes whoa
so what you're saying is people you know
really it really resonates with people
the idea that you know there's so much
more to learn
um maria over to you
well we continue with other more
to
fit here the group or we go to the
square to see
what is going on and
to move with them
to start moving a little bit what do you
think yeah it depends if there's anyone
here
from a breakout room who wants to
feedback
what was being discussed still that
would be great
don't feel obliged obviously
robbed you oh rob or steve do you want a
feedback from ours maybe if you if
you're up for it
about everything
thank you
me saying what i said about
life and
knowledge
okay well i'm afraid to say that my
reading of economic literature on
climate change is that courtesy of that
literature we've delayed action for 50
years and we have therefore massively
overshot the product the sustainable
usage of the planet
so that we are going to go through
catastrophic collapse
and in that catastrophic collapse uh i
use a one stage analogy the seven uh
maslow's hierarchy of needs the pyramid
of seven levels of of
sophistication of needs or down the
bottom you've got sheer survival up the
top you've got whether you go to the
opera or rock concert and i was saying
our conversations uh tend to be ones at
the seventh level well if the whole five
levels below us disappear
then the real question is survival
and
in that situation
what we need to do is to consider how
can we
sustain life on the planet first and
foremost
secondly how can we sustain what is left
of human what we've developed in the way
of human knowledge which is thunder is
is phenomenal when you think about what
we know about the universe is incredible
uh and it would be a tragedy
beyond anything that happened in the
middle ages to lose that knowledge
and the third thing is human life we
come third not first
that means i think a future world which
will unfortunately have a period which
is authoritarian to restrain human
impact upon the biosphere to drag it
back to the point where there's some
chance of it being sustainable some
chance of human civilization surviving
and some chance of the knowledge we've
accumulated still being there and that
doesn't mean encyclopedias that means
mean knowing as ma elon musk must puts
it how to make the machine that makes
the machines if we lose that knowledge
we might as well be back to the stone
age so
that's what i think is the priority and
in that case
i can see us going through a period of
authoritarian rule and if we don't
the final analogy i used was that rather
than having the bottom
slayer of maslow's pyramid we'll just
have sand
steve thank you
for the reality check
um yeah
do you want to improve
this colorful band down there
[Music]
hello so go back to the square
yes
let's go
to the square
so can you hear us down there folks
we're ready for you to take it away
i've just done the same journey asking
them to unmute but you do as well
[Music]
jesus
me
[Music]
oh
so beautiful in the square thank you
people are asking what what is that song
does anyone know what
um does anyone know does anyone able to
tell us what that song was a number of
people were asking does anyone know
no
we'll try and find out
i couldn't hear any spanish what they
were telling yeah
okay
so we've got some beautiful colorful
moves going on down there
so if we've been three hours so that's a
long time for people
yeah i think it's been beautiful should
we get nika to say goodbye
okay
thanks for coming
i'm gonna see if i can get nika to
to uh close the ceremony
is that good maria is that sound a good
idea i think so i think the energy is
going
in in that way now yeah
we can't finish
everyone's got very keen on what's
happening in the square they've sort of
forgotten about zoom
[Laughter]
okay we are keen to close the ceremony
thanks so much to everybody who's come
it's really
thank you to you and maria for
moderating so
generously
you know when people say it's an honor
it literally isn't on it
can you come to
the microphone so i'm just asking uh
yes oh my god yes yes yes brilliant i
think that's going to happen
thanks for helping out john you know
no tech disasters thank you for to rob
for your per your pink filter
there's there's a there's been a sort of
70s psychedelic album vibe going on here
it's to do with the colors or something
i don't know i don't know david would
have liked he liked the pink boat
so i think nick is going to come and
close the ceremony for us
it's been
i don't know how all the conversations
were the conversation that we had in our
breakout room was just
just electric and uh between strangers
and that's what was always beautiful
about
about occupy was
to realize we've got so much more in
common than sets us apart that's what it
was all about you know and in fact very
quickly when you start listening to
people the the stuff that was your
differences become really embarrassing
all right nika nika come and speak to us
come and speak to us here we go here we
go folks
come come
can you are you able to speak to nika or
easily or
john
are you going to close the ceremony for
us
we can hear your voices but quite
faintly i think it's because you're far
away from the microphone yeah bring
bring nika to the microphone bring nika
to the microphone
i think you're right you found i think
they probably can't hear us very well
it's probably a running off
between shouting to the microphone and
and frantic texting
are we just saying goodbye
how we saying goodbye
[Laughter]
keep it lit
care and freedom keep it lit keep
playing the violin
thank you for coming
beautiful
yeah
[Music]
keep it lit
beautiful
bye
bye bye
bye bye thank you
hi thank you
i'm new to this game
we're all new
yeah yeah
i've been preoccupied i'm in here though
[Music]
foreign
is
[Music]
oh
um
[Music]
uh
oh